---
title: "5.1 Instrumenting"
weight: 2
sectionnumber: 1
---

### Task 1

Study the following metrics and decide if the metric name is ok

```
http_requests{handler="/", status="200"}

http_request_200_count{handler="/"}

go_memstats_heap_inuse_megabytes{instance="localhost:9090",job="prometheus"}

prometheus_build_info{branch="HEAD",goversion="go1.15.5",instance="localhost:9090",job="prometheus",revision="de1c1243f4dd66fbac3e8213e9a7bd8dbc9f38b2",version="2.22.2"}

prometheus_config_last_reload_success_timestamp{instance="localhost:9090",job="prometheus"}

prometheus_tsdb_lowest_timestamp_minutes{instance="localhost:9090",job="prometheus"}
```

### Task 2

What kind of risk do you have, when you see such a metric

```
http_requests_total{handler="/etc/passwd", status="404"} 1
```


## Solutions

{{% details title="Task 1" %}}

* The `_total` suffix should be appended, so `http_requests_total{handler="/", status="200"}` is better.

* There are two issues in `http_request_200_count{handler="/"}`: The `_count` suffix is foreseen for histograms, counters can be suffixed with `_total`. Second, status information should not be part of the metric name, a label `{status="200"}` is the better option.

* The base unit is `bytes` not `megabytes`, so `go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes` is correct.

* Everything is ok with `prometheus_build_info` and it's labels. It's a good practice to export such base information with a gauge.

* In `prometheus_config_last_reload_success_timestamp` the base unit is missing, correct is `prometheus_config_last_reload_success_timestamp_seconds`.

* The base unit is `seconds` for timestamps, so `prometheus_tsdb_lowest_timestamp_seconds` is correct.

{{% /details %}}

{{% details title="Task 2" %}}

No, it's not the possible security vulnerability (which seems to be handled appropriate in this case, by the way).

From a Prometheus point of view, there is the risk of a DDOS attack: An attacker could easily make requests to paths which obviously don't exist. As every path is registered with a label, many new timeseries are created which could lead to a [cardinality explosion](https://www.robustperception.io/cardinality-is-key) and finally to out-of-memory errors.

It's hard to recover from that!

For this case, it's better just to count the 404 requests and to lookup the paths in the log files.

```
http_requests_total{status="404"} 15
```

{{% /details %}}
