---
title: "4.2 Tasks: Pushgateway"
weight: 2
sectionnumber: 4.2
onlyWhen: baloise
---

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Execute the `oc` commands using one of those options:

* OpenShift Webconsole Terminal <http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.openshift_console %}}> right top menu `>_`
* On your local machine using the `oc` tool, make sure to login on your OpenShift Cluster first.

{{% /alert %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2 - Push metrics to Pushgateway

In this task you're going to push metrics to the Pushgateway. This is what you would normally do, after a cronjob has completed successfully.
Documentation on how the Pushgateway is implemented at Baloise can be found here: [07 - Push metrics to your Prometheus instance](https://confluence.baloisenet.com/atlassian/display/BALMATE/07+-+Push+metrics+to+your+Prometheus+instance).
In order to [push](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) metrics to the Pushgateway, you can simply send an HTTP `POST` or `PUT` request, with the actual metric we want to push as content.

When pushing metrics to the Pushgateway, you always have to specify the job, therefore the URL Path looks like this:

```bash
http://localhost:9091/metrics/job/<JOB_NAME>{/<LABEL_NAME>/<LABEL_VALUE>}
```

If we want to push the metric `prometheus_training_labs_completed_total` with the value `4` and the job `prometheus_training` to the Pushgateway, we can do that by creating the following Kubernetes Job:

```bash
oc -n <team>-monitoring create job --image=quay.balgroupit.com/library/toolkit:ubuntu-20.04 pushgw-example1 -- \
bash -c "echo 'prometheus_training_labs_completed_total 4' | curl --data-binary @- http://pushgateway.<team>-monitoring:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training"
```

{{% alert title="Command Explanation" color="primary" %}}
If you are not very familiar with `oc create job`. The above command does the following:

* `oc -n ... create job` creates an adhoc [kubernetes job](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/)
* `--image=` specifies, which image the container will use. We will use the toolkit container because it provides bash and curl.
* `pushgw-example1` is the name of the job
* `bash -c "..."` is the command, the job should execute

{{% /alert %}}

Verify the metric in the [Prometheus we UI](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.prometheus %}}/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=prometheus_training_labs_completed_total&g0.tab=1). It may take up to 30s ( Depending on the `scrape_interval`) to be available in Prometheus.

[Push](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) the following metric (notice the `instance` label) to the Pushgateway and make sure the metric gets scraped by Prometheus

```promql
# TYPE some_metric_total counter
# HELP This is just an example metric.
some_metric_total{job="prometheus_training",instance="myinstance"} 42
```

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

To push a metric to the Pushgateway, which will then be scraped by Prometheus, we can simply create the following job. Note the actual content of the HTTP request, is exactly the metric we want Prometheus to scrape.

Execute the following command to push the metric to your Pushgateway:

```bash
oc -n <team>-monitoring create job --image=quay.balgroupit.com/library/toolkit:ubuntu-20.04 pushgw-example2 -- \
bash -c "cat <<EOF | curl --data-binary @- http://pushgateway.<team>-monitoring:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training/instance/myinstance
# TYPE some_metric_total counter
# HELP This is just an example metric.
some_metric_total 42
EOF"
```

{{% alert title="Command Explanation" color="primary" %}}
If you are not very familiar with the Linux shell, the above command does the following:

* the `cat` command reads the actual metric and pipes it to `stdin`
* curl sends a HTTP POST request to the URL <http://localhost:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training/instance/myinstance> with the --data-binary parameter set to `stdin` (the actual metric)

{{% /alert %}}

Verify the metric in the [Prometheus we UI](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.prometheus %}}/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=some_metric_total&g0.tab=1). It may take up to 30s (depending on the `scrape_interval`) to be available in Prometheus.

{{% /details %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.3 - Delete Pushgateway metrics

By sending HTTP `delete` requests to the same endpoint, we can delete metrics from the Pushgateway.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Metrics pushed to the Pushgateway are not automatically purged until you manually delete them via the API or the process restarts. If you persist the metrics with `--persistence.file`, you should ensure that you have set up a job that cleans up the metrics on a regular basis.
{{% /alert %}}

According to the [official Pushgateway documentation](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) you can delete either metrics for specific label combinations (exact match required) or all metrics.

Delete the pushed metrics from the Pushgateway.

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

To delete the metrics for the job `prometheus_training`, you can simply execute the following command:

```bash
oc -n <team>-monitoring create job --image=quay.balgroupit.com/library/toolkit:ubuntu-20.04 pushgw-delete -- \
curl -X DELETE http://pushgateway.<team>-monitoring:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
This will delete metrics with the label set `{job="prometheus_training"}` but not `{job="prometheus_training",another_label="value"}` since the delete methode requires an exact label match.
{{% /alert %}}

The Pushgateway pod has no persistence, so you can delete all metrics stored in Pushgateway by deleting the pod.

```bash
oc -n <team>-monitoring delete pod -l app.kubernetes.io/component=pushgateway
```

Remove the created examples jobs.

```bash
oc -n <team>-monitoring delete jobs pushgw-delete pushgw-example1 pushgw-example2
```

{{% /details %}}
