---
title: "6.3 Tasks: Grafana provisioning"
weight: 2
sectionnumber: 6.3
---

There are multiple ways to configure Grafana. Besides the Web UI you used in the previous tasks, configuration changes can also be applied using provisioning. With Grafana provisioning you can provide ressources (e.g. dashboards, datasources etc. ) as YAML configuration files.

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.1 Add an Alertmanager datasource

* Add the `camptocamp-prometheus-alertmanager-datasource` plugin to your Grafana setup using the `grafana-cli`
* Add your Alertmanager as a provisioned data source and name it `alertmanager`
* Restart Grafana and test your new data source

{{% alert title="Hint" color="primary" %}}
There is a `sample.yaml` you can use as reference in the data source provisioning folder.
{{% /alert %}}


{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

Add Alertmanager data source plugin

```bash
sudo grafana-cli plugins install camptocamp-prometheus-alertmanager-datasource
```

Restart Grafana

```bash
sudo systemctl restart grafana-server.service
```

Add the data source definition

```bash
sudo bash -c 'cat <<EOF > /etc/grafana/provisioning/datasources/alertmanager.yaml
apiVersion: 1
datasources:
  - name: alertmanager
    type: alertmanager
    access: proxy
    url: http://localhost:9093
    type: camptocamp-prometheus-alertmanager-datasource
EOF'
```

Restart Grafana server

```bash
sudo systemctl restart grafana-server.service
```

{{% /details %}}


### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2 Add an Alertmanager dashboard

* Provision this [Alertmanager](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/8010) dashboard
* Make sure the dashboard will be provisioned to the `generic` folder
* Add a variable to your dashboard that let you select the data source

{{% alert title="Hint" color="primary" %}}
There is a `sample.yaml` you can use as a reference in the dashboard provisioning folder.
{{% /alert %}}


{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

Add dashboard provisioner configuration

```bash
sudo bash -c 'cat <<EOF > /etc/grafana/provisioning/dashboards/default.yaml
apiVersion: 1
providers:
  - name: 'default'
    folder: 'generic'
    allowUiUpdates: true
    options:
      path: /var/lib/grafana/dashboards
EOF'
sudo systemctl restart grafana-server.service
```

{{% alert title="Hint" color="primary" %}}
By default it is not possible to edit provisioned dashboards manually via the user interface. Since we want to add a new variable in the next step, we have to allow this by setting the `allowUiUpdates` parameter to `true` provisioning configuration above.
{{% /alert %}}

Get the dashboard
```
sudo bash -c "curl -L  https://grafana.com/api/dashboards/8010/revisions/1/download > /var/lib/grafana/dashboards/alertmanager.json"
```

Add a variable that lets you select multiple data sources

* Navigate to your provisioned dashboard
* Navigate to **Gear symbol > Variables > Add variable**
* In the **General** section
  * Set **Name** to `DS_PROMETHEUS_ALERTMANAGER`
  * Set **Type** to `Datasource`
* In the **Data source options** section
  * Set **Type** to  `PrometheusAlertmanager`
* Update the variables using the `Update` button
* Save the dashboard using the `Save dashboard` button

The variable name `DS_PROMETHEUS_ALERTMANAGER` is used since this is the name the authors of the dasboard used when creating it. However, in general the name can be chosen freely (only word and digit characters are allowed in variable names).

{{% /details %}}
