---
title: "2.3 Tasks: Recording rules"
weight: 2
sectionnumber: 2.3
---

In this lab you are going to create your first own recording rules. [Recoding rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) are very useful when it comes to queries, which are very complex and take a long time to compute.

{{% alert title="Warning" color="secondary" %}}
Recording rules store the result in a new series and they can add additional complexity.
{{% /alert %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.1: Memory usage recording rule

In this task you're going to create your first recording rule.

With this recording rule, we create a new metric that represents the available memory on a node as a percentage. A metric the `node exporter` doesn't expose when running on a machine with an older Linux kernel and needs to be calculated every time.

* Add the following recording rule in a file named `/etc/prometheus/recording_rules.yml` and include it in the Prometheus config
* Query the recording rule in the Prometheus web UI

```yaml
groups:
  - name: node_memory
    rules:
      - record: :node_memory_MemAvailable_bytes:sum
        expr: |
          1 - (
            sum by(instance) (node_memory_MemFree_bytes + node_memory_Cached_bytes + node_memory_Buffers_bytes)
          )
          /
            sum by(instance) (node_memory_MemTotal_bytes)
```

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

Create the recording rule `recording_rules.yml` with the following command:

{{< highlight yaml >}}{{< readfile file="content/en/docs/02/labs/recording_rules.yml" >}}{{< /highlight >}}

```bash
curl -o /etc/prometheus/recording_rules.yml \
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/puzzle/prometheus-training/main/content/en/docs/02/labs/recording_rules.yml
```

We also need to tell Prometheus to consider the new `recording_rules.yml` file, by altering the `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

```yaml
rule_files:
  - "recording_rules.yml"
```

The last thing we need to do is to reload Prometheus.

```bash
sudo systemctl reload prometheus
```

After configuring the recording rule and reloading the configuration, Prometheus provides those metrics accordingly.

Use your `recording_rule` definition in the expression browser:

```promql
:node_memory_MemAvailable_bytes:sum
```

or hit the following link:
<http://LOCALHOST:9090/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=%3Anode_memory_MemAvailable_bytes%3Asum>

{{% /details %}}

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
If you take a look at the historical metrics, you will notice that there is no backfilling of your data. Only data since activation of the recording rule is available.
{{% /alert %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2: CPU utilization recording rule

In this lab you are going to create a CPU utilization recording rule.

* Create a rule to record the **CPU utilization** of your VM
* Make sure that Prometheus evaluates this rule every **10 seconds**
* Verify in the Prometheus web UI that you can query your recording rule

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

As you saw in a previous exercise, the `node_cpu_seconds_total` metric contains the CPU utilization of a node. We can use the `mode` label on this metric to filter for `idle` cpu time.

All other modes than `idle` indicate, that the CPU is used. Therefore we can simply subtract the idle percentage from 100 % and get the value we want.

Add the following recording rule to `/etc/prometheus/recording_rules.yml`:

```yaml
groups:
...
  - name: node_cpu
    interval: 10s
    rules:
      - record: instance:node_cpu_utilisation:rate5m
        expr: |
          100 - (
            avg by (instance) (rate(node_cpu_seconds_total{mode="idle"}[5m]))
            * 100
          )
```

By specifying the `interval`, you can overwrite the default evaluation interval.

Reload Prometheus

```bash
sudo systemctl reload prometheus
```

Query your recording rule using the expression browser: <http://LOCALHOST:9090/graph?g0.expr=instance%3Anode_cpu_utilisation%3Arate5m>
{{% /details %}}
