---
title: "8.1 Tasks: Application Monitoring"
weight: 8
sectionnumber: 8.1
onlyWhenNot: baloise
---

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.1: Create a ServiceMonitor

**Task description**:

Create a ServiceMonitor for the example application

* Create a ServiceMonitor, which will configure Prometheus to scrape metrics from the example-web-python application every 30 seconds.
  * hint: `{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f my_file.yaml` will create a resource in the Kubernetes namespace

For this to work, you need to ensure:

* The example-web-python Service is labeled correctly and matches the labels you've defined in your ServiceMonitor.
* The port name in your ServiceMonitor configuration matches the port name in the Service definition.
  * hint: check with `{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics get service example-web-python -o yaml`
* Verify the target in the Prometheus user interface.

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

Create the following ServiceMonitor (`~/work/servicemonitor.yaml`) in the `application-metrics` namespace

{{< readfile file="/content/en/docs/08/labs/servicemonitor.yaml" code="true" lang="yaml" >}}

Apply it using the following command:

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f ~/work/servicemonitor.yaml
```

Verify that the target gets scraped in the [Prometheus user interface](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/targets). Target name: `serviceMonitor/application-metrics/example-web-python-monitor/0` (it may take up to a minute for Prometheus to load the new configuration and scrape the metrics).

{{% /details %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2: Deploy a database and use a sidecar container to expose metrics

**Task description**:

As we've learned in [Lab 4 - Prometheus exporters](../../../04/) when applications do not expose metrics in the Prometheus format, there are a lot of exporters available to convert metrics into the correct format. In Kubernetes this is often done by deploying so called sidecar containers along with the actual application.

Use the following command to deploy a MariaDB database in the `application-metrics` namespace.

```bash
curl -o ~/work/mariadb.yaml \
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/puzzle/prometheus-training/main/content/en/docs/08/labs/mariadb.yaml
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f ~/work/mariadb.yaml
```

This will create a [Secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) (username password to access the database), a [Service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) and the [Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/).

* Deploy the [mariadb exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/mysqld_exporter) from <https://registry.hub.docker.com/r/prom/mysqld-exporter/> as a sidecar container
  * Alter the existing MariaDB deployment definition (~/work/mariadb.yaml) to contain the side car
  * Apply your changes to the cluster with `{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f ~/work/mariadb.yaml`
* Create a ServiceMonitor to instruct Prometheus to scrape the sidecar container

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

First we need to alter the deployment of the MariaDB with adding the MariaDB exporter as a second container.
Then extend the service by adding a second port for the MariaDB exporter.

{{< readfile file="/content/en/docs/08/labs/mariadb-sidecar.yaml" code="true" lang="yaml" >}}

We can apply the file above using:

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f ~/work/mariadb.yaml
```

Then we also need to create a new ServiceMonitor `~/work/servicemonitor-sidecar.yaml`.

{{< readfile file="/content/en/docs/08/labs/servicemonitor-sidecar.yaml" code="true" lang="yaml" >}}

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f ~/work/servicemonitor-sidecar.yaml
```

Verify that the target gets scraped in the [Prometheus user interface](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/targets). Target name: `application-metrics/mariadb/0` (It may take up to a minute for Prometheus to load the new configuration and
scrape the metrics).

{{% /details %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.3: Troubleshooting Kubernetes Service Discovery

We will now deploy an application with an error in the monitoring configration.

* Deploy [Loki](https://grafana.com/oss/loki/) in the loki namespace

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} create ns loki
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki create deployment loki \
--image=mirror.gcr.io/grafana/loki:latest
```

* Create a Service for Loki

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki create -f \
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/puzzle/prometheus-training/main/content/en/docs/08/labs/service-loki.yaml
```

* Create the Loki ServiceMonitor

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki create -f \
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/puzzle/prometheus-training/main/content/en/docs/08/labs/servicemonitor-loki.yaml
```

* When you visit the [Prometheus user interface](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/targets) you will notice, that the Prometheus Server does not scrape metrics from Loki. Try to find out why.

{{% alert title="Troubleshooting: Prometheus is not scrapping metrics" color="primary" %}}
The cause that Prometheus is not able to scrape metrics is usually one of the following.

* The configuration defined in the ServiceMonitor does not appear in the Prometheus scrape configuration
  * Check if the label of your ServiceMonitor matches the label defined in the `serviceMonitorSelector` field of the Prometheus custom resource
  * Check the Prometheus operator logs for errors (Permission issues or invalid ServiceMonitors)
* The Endpoint appears in the Prometheus scrape config but not under targets.
  * The namespaceSelector in the ServiceMonitor does not match the namespace of your app
  * The label selector does not match the Service of your app
  * The port name does not match the Service of your app
* The Endpoint appears as a Prometheus target, but no data gets scraped
  * The application does not provide metrics under the correct path and port
  * Networking issues
  * Authentication required, but not configured

{{% /alert %}}

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

The quickest way to do this is to follow the instructions in the info box above. So let's first find out which of the following statements apply to us

* The configuration defined in the ServiceMonitor does not appear in the Prometheus scrape configuration
  * Let's check if Prometheus reads the configuration defined in the ServiceMonitor resource. To do so navigate to [Prometheus configuration](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/config) and search if `loki` appears in the scrape_configuration. You should find a job with the name `serviceMonitor/loki/loki/0`, therefore this should not be the issue in this case.
* The Endpoint appears in the [Prometheus configuration](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/config) but not under targets.
  * Lets check if the application is running
    ```bash
    {{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki get pod
    ```
    The output should be similar to the following:
    ```bash
    NAME                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    loki-5846d87f4c-tthsr   1/1     Running   0          34m
    ```
  * Lets check if the application is exposing metrics
    ```bash
    PODNAME=$({{% param cliToolName %}} get pod -n loki -l app=loki -o name)
    {{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki exec $PODNAME -it -- wget -O - localhost:3100/metrics
    ...
    ```
  * The application exposes metrics and Prometheus generated the configuration according to the defined servicemonitor. Let's verify, if the ServiceMonitor matches the Service.
    ```bash
    {{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki get svc loki -o yaml
    ```

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      ...
      labels:
        app: loki
      name: loki
      namespace: loki
    spec:
      ...
      ports:
      - name: http
        ...
    ```
    We see that the Service has the port named `http` and the label `app: loki` set. Let's check the ServiceMonitor
    ```bash
    {{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki get servicemonitor loki -o yaml
    ```

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
    kind: ServiceMonitor
    ...
    spec:
      endpoints:
      - interval: 30s
        ...
        port: http
        ...
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          prometheus-monitoring: "true"
    ```
    We see that the ServiceMonitor expect the port named `http` and a label `prometheus-monitoring: "true"` set. So the culprit is the missing label. Let's set the label on the Service.
    ```bash
    {{% param cliToolName %}} -n loki label svc loki prometheus-monitoring=true
    ```

    Verify that the target now gets scraped in the [Prometheus user interface](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/targets).

{{% /details %}}

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.4: Blackbox monitoring in Kubernetes (optional)

In [Lab 4 - Prometheus exporters](../../../04/) we came across the blackbox exporter and learned how configuring a [multi-target exporter through relabel_configs](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/multi-target-exporter/) can be a bit tricky to understand. The Prometheus operator brings us a so-called Probe custom resource, which allows us to define the targets for a black box exporter in a much simplified way.

**Task description**:

* Create a [Probe custom resource](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/master/Documentation/design.md#probe) in the application-metrics namespace for the example-web-python application
* Use the Prometheus expression browser to check if the new metric is being scraped

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

Use `{{% param cliToolName %}} describe crd probe | less` to describe the crd and get the available options.

{{% /alert %}}

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

Create the following probe custom resource (`~/work/probe.yaml`) in the `application-metrics` namespace

{{< readfile file="/content/en/docs/08/labs/probe.yaml" code="true" lang="yaml" >}}

Apply it using the following command:

```bash
{{% param cliToolName %}} -n application-metrics apply -f ~/work/probe.yaml
```

Verify that the target gets scraped in the [Prometheus user interface](http://{{% param replacePlaceholder.k8sPrometheus %}}/targets). Target name: `application-metrics/example-web-python-probe` (It may take up to a minute for Prometheus to load the new
configuration and scrape the metrics).

Check for the following metric in Prometheus:

```promql
{instance="example-web-python.application-metrics.svc:5000/health"}
```
{{% /details %}}
